---
ID: 2339
post_title: Moving on
author: David
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: https://davidsherlock.co.uk/moving-on/
published: true
post_date: 2015-05-15 07:45:20
---
8 years ago I was heading in to summer working hard on my MSc project. My head space was completely absorbed in it for two reasons. 1) It was a interesting subject, 2) I didn't want to think about what happens next. The whole looking for a job after University is a scary thing, I didn't know what I wanted to do or even how to start thinking about what I wanted to do. I applied for some network security type gigs, didn't hear anything back.

My personal tutor at the time, <a href="http://dailyimprovisation.blogspot.co.uk/">Mark Johnson</a> told me there were some research bods looking for somebody to write a bit of PHP for them. I told Mark I didn't want to do PHP because it was boring and yet he still made me go to the interview. I met a chap called Oleg who evaluated me at the interview as 'a bit pale but will do'. We agreed I would work with them for 3 months. 'It's a foot in the door' I thought.

8 years later and my 3 month trial has ended. It's been a cracking 3 months. I've worked on interesting projects with amazing and incredibly talented people. My only regret is perhaps not spending enough time and energy with some of them, but I won't make the same mistake twice. As most of my colleagues in this department move on, I will move on with them. The people of this institution have given me incredible opportunities I could only have dreamed of when I started my summer MSc project. It was scary then not knowing what could be around the corner, but this summer having seen a glimpse, it is actually quite exciting.